Science
110
Let us examine some examples to understand how hormones help
in coordinated growth. We have all seen salt packets which say ‘iodised
salt’ or ‘enriched with iodine’. Why is it important for us to have iodised
salt in our diet? Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make
thyroxin hormone. Thyroxin regulates carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism in the body so as to provide the best balance for growth.
Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin. In case iodine is deficient
in our diet, there is a possibility that we might suffer from goitre. One
of the symptoms in this disease is a swollen neck. Can you correlate
this with the position of the thyroid gland in Fig. 6.7?
Sometimes we come across people who are either very short (dwarfs)
or extremely tall (giants). Have you ever wondered how this happens?
Growth hormone is one of the hormones secreted by the pituitary. As
its name indicates, growth hormone regulates growth and development
of the body. If there is a deficiency of this hormone in childhood, it
leads to dwarfism.
You must have noticed many dramatic changes in your appearance
as well as that of your friends as you approached 10–12 years of age.
These changes associated with puberty are because of the secretion of
testosterone in males and oestrogen in females.
Do you know anyone in your family or friends who has been advised
by the doctor to take less sugar in their diet because they are suffering
from diabetes? As a treatment, they might be taking injections of insulin.
This is a hormone which is produced by the pancreas and helps in
regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts,
the sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects.
Figure 6.7 Endocrine glands in human beings (a) male, (b) female
(a)
(b)
Do You Know?
Hypothalamus plays
an important role in
the release of many
hormones. For
example, when the
level of growth
hormone is low, the
hypothalamus
releases growth
hormone releasing
factor which
stimulates the
pituitary gland to
release growth
hormone.
Reprint 2026-27