How do Organisms Reproduce?
123
participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must
be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such
as new hair-growth patterns, are signals that sexual maturation is taking
place.
On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two
people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it
is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is
carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed
later. The female reproductive organs and breasts will need to mature to
accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in
the process of sexual reproduction.
7.3.3 (a) Male Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Fig. 7.10)
consists of portions which produce the
germ-cells and other portions that deliver
the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.
The formation of germ-cells or sperms
takes place in the testes. These are located
outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum
because sperm formation requires a lower
temperature than the normal body
temperature. We have discussed the role of the
testes in the secretion of the hormone,
testosterone, in the previous chapter. In
addition to regulating the formation of sperms,
testosterone brings about changes in
appearance seen in boys at the time of puberty.
The sperms formed are delivered
through the vas deferens which unites with
a tube coming from the urinary bladder. The
urethra thus forms a common passage for
both the sperms and urine. Along the path
of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate
and the seminal vesicles add their secretions
so that the sperms are now in a fluid which
makes their transport easier and this fluid
also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny
bodies that consist of mainly genetic
material and a long tail that helps them to
move towards the female germ-cell.
7.3.3 (b) Female Reproductive System
The female germ-cells or eggs are made in
the ovaries. They are also responsible for the
production of some hormones. Look at
Fig. 7.11 and identify the various organs in
the female reproductive system.
Figure 7.10 
Figure 7.10 
Figure 7.10 
Figure 7.10 
Figure 7.10 Human–male reproductive system
Figure 7.11 
Figure 7.11 
Figure 7.11 
Figure 7.11 
Figure 7.11 Human –female reproductive system
Reprint 2026-27