Life Processes
89
cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusion
depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of
the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO2
elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO2 generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence
there is no CO2 release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at
this time.
Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen
from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide
produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water.
Activity 5.6
Activity 5.6
Activity 5.6
Activity 5.6
Activity 5.6
n
Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths
and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the
opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some
manner?
n
Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.
n
Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
minute.
Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared
to the amount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic
organisms is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms.
Fishes take in water through their mouths and force it past the
gills where the dissolved oxygen is taken up by blood.
Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for
respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in
different animals. All these organs have a structure that increases
the surface area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich
atmosphere. Since the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
has to take place across this surface, this surface is very fine
and delicate. In order to protect this surface, it is usually placed
within the body, so there have to be passages that will take air
to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving the air
in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.
In human beings (Fig. 5.9), air is taken into the body through
the nostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by
fine hairs that line the passage. The passage is also lined with
mucus which helps in this process. From here, the air passes
through the throat and into the lungs. Rings of cartilage are
present in the throat. These ensure that the air-passage does
not collapse.
Using tobacco directly or
any product of tobacco in
the form of cigar, cigarettes,
bidis, hookah, gutkha, etc.,
is harmful. Use of tobacco
most commonly affects the
tongue, lungs, heart and
liver. Smokeless tobacco is
also a major risk factor for
heart attacks, strokes,
pulmonary diseases and
several forms of cancers.
There is a high incidence of
oral cancer in India due to
the chewing of tobacco in
the form of gutkha. Stay
healthy; just say NO to
tobacco and its products!
More to Know!
Reprint 2026-27