Science
90
Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller
tubes which finally terminate in balloon-like structures which
are called alveoli (singular–alveolus). The alveoli provide a surface
where the exchange of gases can take place. The walls of the alveoli
contain an extensive network of blood-vessels. As we have seen
in earlier years, when we breathe in, we lift our ribs and flatten
our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomes larger as a result.
Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fills the expanded
alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest of the body
for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar air is
taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported
to all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is
taken in and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume
of air so that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed
and for the carbon dioxide to be released.
When the body size of animals is large,  the diffusion pressure
alone cannot take care of oxygen delivery to all parts of the body.
Instead, respiratory pigments take up oxygen from the air in the
lungs and carry it to tissues which are deficient in oxygen before
releasing it. In human beings, the respiratory pigment is
haemoglobin which has a very high affinity for oxygen. This pigment
is present in the red blood corpuscles. Carbon dioxide is more
soluble in water than oxygen is and hence is mostly transported in
the dissolved form in our blood.
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9 Human respiratory system
Do You Know?
Smoking is injurious to
health.
Lung cancer is one of
common causes of
deaths in the world. The
upper part of respiratory
tract is provided with
small 
hair-like
structures called cilia.
These cilia help to
remove germs, dust and
other harmful  particles
from 
inhaled 
air.
Smoking destroys these
hair due to which germs,
dust, smoke and other
harmful chemicals enter
lungs 
and 
cause
infection, cough and
even lung cancer.
Reprint 2026-27